Multilateralism is the right way to keep
the international order stable and
promote humanity's development [music]
and progress. The rules must apply
equally to everyone. A handful of
countries should not enjoy privileges
based on their strengths and the world
must not return to the law of the jungle
where the strong bully the weak. [music]
Every country is entitled to defend its
legitimate rights and interests.
>> [music]
>> Helong there, China's vice premier and
Beijing's top trade negotiator, speaking
at the World Economic Forum in Davos.
And he presented China as an advocate of
cooperation, free trade, and
multilateralism, reiterating many of
Beijing's frequent talking points. Of
course, while Hill insists that China
backs this real rules-based global
order, obviously there a lot of
questions about Taiwan emerge, right?
And whether Taiwanese independence
remains a clear red line. Beijing has
been ratcheting up pressure, staging its
most expansive military drills in
decades near the island last month,
including a livefire exercises and even
no fly warnings. And Chinese President
Xiinping has told the People's
Liberation Army it should work to become
what he calls a worldclass military.
2027 marks the centenery of the PLA. And
and some US defense planners have linked
that date to a potential attack on
Taiwan. But Chinese officials dismiss
that notion of any timeline for any
invasion. Now, Washington has long
maintained a policy of strategic
ambiguity when it comes to Taiwan, but
the US has helped arm the island,
including an 11 billion weapon sale
announced in December. Beijing maintains
it has a right to take the island by
force if necessary to prevent its formal
independence.
>> People talk about the status quo in
Taiwan Strait. I would argue there is no
status quo that is static. Yeah. With
each provocation and with each response
from the PLA, the status quo would be
changed reversibly. Yeah. Toward the
favor of the Chinese mainland.
>> If China attacks Taiwan is the title of
the December
report and study out of the German
Marshall Fund that's gamed out two
scenarios of how that conflict might
develop. Joining us now to talk us
through this is the co-author of the
report, Zack Cooper, senior fellow at
the American Enterprise Institute. Also
with us here to join the conversation is
Steven Angel, our chief North Asia
correspondent. Uh Zach, good morning
from the Asia Pacific. Thank you. Thank
you for joining us. Well, let me just
get maybe started with the maybe the
obvious and the simple. Uh what was the
rationale behind the study? What was the
what is the objective here just to that
you guys want to shed light on?
>> Well, thanks David. I I think the key
question for us was we spend so much
time looking at scenarios in which the
United States loses a conflict over
Taiwan. And as an American, we test out
those scenarios to understand where our
weak points are. But sometimes it
implies that actually in any conflict,
the US would struggle and that China
would be wildly successful. I think most
of us believe the opposite. And so this
was an effort to look at what the cost
to China would be in four different
areas. We looked at economic costs. We
looked at domestic political costs,
military costs and then uh diplomatic or
reputational costs. And the surprise to
me was that I I think in all four areas
the costs are quite high. I wouldn't
assert that they will be enough to deter
Xinping if he feels that he has to take
action, but I think the costs are
probably higher than most people would
otherwise assume.
Can you walk us through some of the
costs whether it's economically um
militarily and even social stability? I
know you have four pillars there of what
some of the scenarios that you've laid
out.
>> Yeah. You know, I think some of the most
obvious costs are the economic ones and
Bloomberg has done a great job uh
demonstrating how costly this is. uh you
know some of the data that's come out
has suggested it could be close to let's
say 10 to 15% of uh GDP. Uh so that
that's obviously a significant figure as
a conflict goes on. But what we try to
do is break this down into two different
kinds of contingencies. One which was a
relatively minor skirmish and then a
second which was a much larger war. And
uh I think what you see is that over the
course of these two conflicts, they look
very different. So a minor skirmish, the
costs are relatively small and they're
sort of shortterm, whereas a major war,
these are massive costs. They take a
very long time to deal with and uh you
know they could last for many years. And
so if you look at the economic costs,
it's not just in terms of trade at the
point in which there's a conflict. It's
also what happens to trade and supply
chains long after that. Uh just one
other item I would highlight is I think
some of the work here on the domestic
stability threats is really uh new and
important and one of the takeaways for
me was that the challenges that Xiinping
might face in a failed conflict could be
huge uh not just for the people's
liberation army but also for the other
Chinese domestic security services that
would be responsible for upholding order
in the aftermath of a failed conflict.
Zach, Steve Angel here. I I see the
result or the report essentially goes in
to the the results of these different
scenarios and the outcomes. How much
goes into the rationale for doing so?
Because I also see that again the German
Marshall Fund uh is a nonpartisan
organization that essentially advances
transatlantic partnership. I want to
kind of bring that to the four with
today's headlines with what's happening
between the United States and Europe.
Does when we're talking about the
rationale, does the calculus of
essentially a deterioration of
crossatlantic alliance between US and
Europe embolden Beijing to carry out one
of these scenarios? or does it
essentially undermine what they've been
talking about at Davos and that is they
are the the the responsible world power
right now.
>> Yeah. You know, I think a lot of people
would have sort of chuckled at the
comments that you aired from Hi Fun. Uh
but now I think they you know those are
going to appeal to a lot of countries
who are watching what the United States
is doing with Greenland and has done
with Venezuela. Uh I think at the end of
the day this really does undermine
security in East Asia and one of the
reasons is that so many of the costs to
China depend on international responses
and yes the US might be the biggest
player there. Japan is certainly
critical, as are South Korea, Australia,
and others, but Europe has a really
important role to play. And one thing
that the Biden team had been pretty good
at was getting a lot of European allies
and partners on board with at least
contemplating strong responses to a
Chinese use of force against Taiwan. I
think it's going to be a pretty hard
sell these days for the United States to
be asking Europe to take on, let's say,
the anti-coercion mechanism that they've
developed and use it against China. In
fact, they're talking about using it
against the United States over
Greenland. And so, I think this
absolutely undermines deterrence. It
doesn't mean that I would expect
Xiinping to take action against Taiwan
anytime soon, but I think it it is uh
damaging the crossstrait stability that
we all hope will be able to be
maintained over the next few years.
>> Zach, just looking at the the the major
war scenario that you guys are playing
out, I just want to ask what what what
the what the assumption is of the study
in terms of the extent of US military
involvement.
So in the major war scenario, we assumed
a pretty great extent of US involvement.
And the reason is uh if you're a Chinese
military planner, one of your incentives
is to go big and go early. And what I
mean by that is uh you can either leave
US forces alone across the region or you
can strike them very hard very early. If
you don't strike them early, you put at
risk Chinese forces that would be very
vulnerable to US attacks, especially
large amphibious vessels that would need
to cross the straight. Remember, we're
probably talking 3 to 400,000
Chinese troops that would have to land
on Taiwan and they're not swimming
there. They've got to get there on
boats. Uh those are extremely vulnerable
platforms. And so we assumed in the
major war scenario that the Chinese
would probably try and strike US assets
whether that could be a US aircraft
carrier right at the outset or
facilities in Okinawa, Guam and
elsewhere. Uh and from my standpoint
that means the US has to fight. I know,
you know, every American president has
their own predilictions on this issue,
but I think if you saw a 5,000 person US
carrier disabled uh somewhere in the
Pacific, I think Americans would
probably force the president to fight.
So, that was our assumption. And I'll
say, you know, of course, these
scenarios would look really different if
the US wasn't so engaged. Uh, and so the
minor skirmish we looked at had a much
lower level of engagement where we
really had just Taiwan and China
fighting it out. And you see very
different costs to China in that
scenario.
>> But Zach, you also in both of these
scenarios conclude that the PLA would
not be victorious. Correct. And if
you're sending missiles to US bases in
Japan and to Guam, uh that would almost
assuredly bring the United States into a
full-on war, which would sort of
undermine the main uh objective there of
Beijing, and that is unification with
Taiwan.
>> Yeah, Stephen, I think that's right. And
you know, one of our going in
assumptions for this project was to look
at what happened in a failed Chinese
effort. So, we weren't trying to examine
the possibility that China might
succeed, but I'll say as as somebody
that used to do war planning at the
Pentagon, my assumption is still that
China would be very successful in the
first few days of a conflict and then
they would bog down particularly in an
amphibious conflict uh where they'd have
to transit such a difficult body of
water with so many troops and keep them
supplied. This is an incredibly
difficult operation and you're talking
about a military that hasn't done
anything of this sort, a major conflict
since 1979 and they lost that conflict.
So this is really hard for even the best
militaries. And so my assumption and our
assumption in this report is that the
Chinese side would have a huge amount of
trouble trying to carry out those types
of operations. But even if they were
moderately successful, many of these
costs still apply, right? the economic
cost, the cost of the military, they
they would still be quite serious.
>> And Zach, I I have to bring it back to
kind of the news of late, right? It it
took days for the US, for example, to to
take over Venezuela and its leader,
Maduro.
In your view, do you think that there is
a feasible scenario where this could be
a very swift and total Chinese victory
of Taiwan? Mhm.
>> So, I do think we have to worry about
what I would call a decapitation strike,
which is essentially what the United
States did with Venezuela. Um, I I will
admit even I was surprised at how
proficient the US was in carrying out
that operation. I doubt that the Chinese
could do anything similar. But the
scenario that a lot of us have worried
about is whether they could do let's say
missile strikes uh with very little
warning against the Taiwanese
presidential compound. Um is that
possible? Perhaps. Uh, I think it's
unlikely and it wouldn't necessarily
give them control over the island, but
in the aftermath of the Venezuela
operation, I think both Taiwan and China
are probably looking much more seriously
at decapitation strikes and uh probably
preparing uh either to threaten to use
them or to defend against them. And so
this is something that I would think the
Taiwan military is going to be looking
at very seriously and trying to think
about probably bolstering some of the
defenses around the president
presidential office and some of the key
defense ministry compounds.
>> So Zach, the
what we've laid out the the potential
consequences in in both cases. What's
the what's the conclusion? Is the is the
undertaking worth undertaking?
>> Well, my view has always been that
actually Xiinping is relatively risk
averse when it comes to these kinds of
major decisions. And so I think this
just adds fuel to that argument that the
cost of this sort of operation would be
so high that it would be a pretty huge
risk and unlikely to be successful and
therefore it's not something that he
should do unless he feels that he's
absolutely boxed in. And I don't see
Linga, I don't see Donald Trump boxing
Xi Jinping in in the next couple of
years. And so that makes me somewhat
more confident that although I think
we're going to have a very difficult
period between now and let's say 2028
when there are elections in Taiwan,
that I think we can hopefully maintain
deterrence. And so the the big takeaway
for me is just about how huge these
costs are in very different areas and
how difficult they would be for Beijing
to manage. And so I I think that is a
cautionary tale for Chinese leaders when
they're thinking about potentially
taking military actions against Taiwan.